Buried deep beneath American soil,
hidden behind layers of steel and
concrete, stood the largest missile ever
deployed by the United States, the Titan
2, an intercontinental ballistic missile
capable of launching in under a minute
and surviving a nuclear blast, waited in
silence during the Cold War for an order
that everyone prayed would never come.
In this video, we modeled the entire
Titan 2 underground missile launch
complex to reveal the engineering that
made it both unstoppable and
untouchable.
But before we get into it, I'm Lion and
this is Deconstructed. We break down the
engineering behind history's most
fascinating machines, vehicles, and
structures. Let's see how it all works.
First, I want to give a huge thanks to
Supremacy World War II for sponsoring
this video. The Titan 2 was built during
the Cold War, a period of global rivalry
when the world stood on edge as it
anticipated World War II. And in
Supremacy World War II, you're living
through the war that never was. This
free online PvP strategy game lets you
command a real country through modern
global warfare, building armies of
tanks, jets, and even missiles like
Titan 2. Form alliances, launch surprise
attacks, and compete against 99 other
players in real time. What I love most
is the strategy. You have to think like
a real commander. Every choice has
consequences. With cross-platform play,
you can command from PC or mobile.
Use my link in the description to claim
your exclusive starter pack. The Elite
Bomber, a $25 value for new players
only. Available for 30 days. So, if
you've ever wondered what it would feel
like to command a power once sealed
inside a Titan 2 missile, this is your
chance. Click the link below, claim your
rewards, and conquer the world. Now,
back to the video. US interest in
long-range missiles intensified near the
end of World War II when American
engineers studied Germany's V2 rocket,
the world's first longrange guided
ballistic missile. Standing 14 m tall
with a range of about 320 km, it was a
technical marvel for its time, though
still a fraction of what later missiles
would achieve. By comparison, the Titan
2 would reach 31 m in height and gain
speeds up to 25,000 km per hour, roughly
20 times the speed of sound. The first
nuclear weapons were too large and heavy
for the rockets of that time. So, they
could only be delivered by bombers.
However, by the early 1950s,
technological advances made a new idea
possible. The intercontinental ballistic
missile or ICBM, a weapon capable of
traveling more than 5,500 km. As cold
war tensions deepened and fears of
Soviet progress grew, the United States
made ICBM development a top national
priority. In 1955, two ambitious
programs were launched side by side,
Project Atlas and Project Titan. Early
models such as the Atlas F and Titan 1
were stored vertically on elevators
inside underground silos, but before
launch, they had to be fueled and raised
to the surface, a process that took up
to 15 minutes and left them dangerously
exposed to attack. Then came the Titan
2, which changed everything. By
switching to storeable propellants, the
missile could remain fueled at all
times. For the first time, a missile
could ignite underground, reducing the
launch sequence to less than a minute.
The Titan 2 was in service from 1963 to
1987, during which time 54 missiles were
deployed across three US Air Force bases
in Arizona, Arkansas, and Kansas.
It was the largest missile ever fielded
by the US, weighing 150,000 kg,
including the propellant, which is
equivalent to the weight of more than
four fully loaded semi-trail trucks.
The Titan 2 was a two-stage liquid fuel
rocket. Each stage contained its own
fuel and oxidizer tanks arranged in
tandem with the tank walls forming the
outer skin of the missile. The second
stage carried the re-entry vehicle
equipped with a single thermonuclear
warhead, a weapon with a yield of 9
megat tons or about 600 times more
powerful than little boy. The first
atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima in
1945.
Its range was an impressive 10,000 km,
able to strike its target in just 30
minutes.
Ballistic missiles like the Titan 2 were
stored in hardened underground silos,
massive structures built of reinforced
concrete and steel to survive the shock
waves of potential nearby nuclear
explosions.
But no amount of hardening could
withstand a direct hit. So designers had
to determine how much protection was
enough. Launch sites were engineered to
survive the blast of a 10 megaton
nuclear explosion detonating 1.4 km
away. Before we dive deeper, we actually
turned this video into something you can
own. We created a detailed Titan to
missile silo poster, mapping out every
level of the underground complex, even
including details that we couldn't fit
into the video. Each of our videos takes
hundreds of hours of research, modeling,
and animation. And every purchase
directly supports the channel and the
team behind it. The poster is now
available and 10% off for the first 7
days. Grab yours through the link in the
description. We're also giving one away.
For a chance to win one, comment below
what surprised you the most about the
Titan 2 launch complex. We'll announce
the winner in the next video.
Let's take a closer look at the
underground launch complex in which the
Titan 2 was stored. Starting at the
surface, the launch complex was fairly
unremarkable and pretty easy to miss. A
fenced off patch of land in the middle
of nowhere. The site's first line of
defense was a barb wire perimeter fence.
There were no guards nor cameras topside
to monitor the surface. Instead,
security relied on a radar-based
intrusion detection system. This system
projected invisible beams around the
inside of the fence, triggering an alarm
if anything crossed them. When that
happened, external security forces from
nearby bases were immediately dispatched
to investigate.
Communication was crucial. Inside the
complex, the crew's primary duty was to
listen for one thing, a possible launch
order. So to ensure constant contact,
the site used multiple antennas built
with redundancy in mind. There were two
types of antennas. Soft antennas, which
were exposed on the surface and
vulnerable to an attack, and hard
antennas, which were kept underground.
These hard antennas could be deployed
after a nuclear blast, ensuring the crew
could still receive commands even if the
surface was destroyed.
The most impressive feature was the silo
closure door. We'll explore how it
worked in more detail later.
Ventilation for the entire underground
complex came through three air shafts
which circulated fresh air through the
silo and crew areas.
And finally, the only way into the
facility itself was through the access
portal. Beneath the surface, the Titan 2
complex stretched out like a buried
fortress. An inline network of
reinforced tunnels called cableways,
roughly 92 m long from end to end,
connecting three massive structures,
each one hardened to withstand the shock
of a nearby nuclear blast. At one end
stood the launch control center. In the
middle was the access portal and the
blast lock area. And at the far end was
the missile silo. Together, these
sections formed the sealed underground
world, one purpose-built to ensure
attack and strike back within minutes.
Let's dive deeper into each section.
First, the access portal was the only
way into the underground complex. Unlike
the hardened structures below, the
portal itself was a soft structure,
vulnerable in the way the exposed
antennas were, and not designed to
survive a nuclear blast. A 10- m deep
vertical shaft extended from the
surface, housing both a stairwell and a
freight elevator. A stairway led down to
the electrically locked portal door.
Inside, another stairwell continued
downward. A second inner door, also
electrically locked, set just below the
first landing along the stairwell. To
enter, personnel followed a strict
multi-step phone procedure. The first
call was made at the perimeter gate to
request the gate to be open. Within 3
minutes, a second call had to be made at
the outer portal to request access. If
the second call was delayed beyond the
3-minute window, external security
forces were automatically dispatched. If
crew members were being forced to enter
under duress, such as at gunpoint, they
could deliberately delay the second
call, triggering the security response
without having to say a word. Once
inside, a third call was made from the
enttrapment area, a secure cage between
the first and second doors. This call
required a one-time entry code, which
was immediately destroyed by burning the
card after use. A visual identification
was then confirmed through CCTV before
the second door was unlocked. From
there, personnel descended the stairway
and made a fourth and final call to
request the opening of the first blast
door, giving access to the blast lock
area.
The blast lock area acted as the bridge
between the outside world and the
underground launch complex, connecting
the launch control center to the missile
silo. Built of reinforced concrete and
fitted with four massive steel blast
doors, it was designed to shield the
crew from both nuclear detonations above
and potential explosions of the missile
within the silo. The blast doors were
numbered 6, 7, 8, and 9, split into two
pairs that formed two separate blast
lock chambers. Doors 6, and 7 made up
the outer blast lock, offering
protection from a nuclear blast, while
doors 8 and 9 formed the inner blast
lock, which guarded against a missile
explosion. Each door weighed
approximately 2700 kg and was secured by
four large hydraulically driven steel
pins, one at each corner. to lock the
door into its frame. Both doors in a
pair were electronically interlocked and
could not be opened simultaneously.
Blast door 7 led to the inner blast lock
area from which crews could open door 8
to reach the short cableway to the
launch control center or door 9 to
access the long cableway that extended
to the missile silo. The space behind
door 9 also served as a decontamination
area for the propellant transferred
personnel handling the Titan 2's
extremely toxic propellants which could
be fatal. It contain an emergency shower
and storage for protective suits. Moving
deeper into the complex brought you to
the launch control center where launch
orders were executed. The top of its
reinforced concrete shell was built with
a dome shape designed to deflect and
reduce the effect of a nuclear blast
above. Inside the shell, a three-story
steel structure hung from the roof by
eight massive shock mounts designed to
absorb the ground shock from a nuclear
blast. These mounts, each made up of
suspension rods and coil springs
compressed under static loads. Level
one, the top floor, served as the crew's
living quarters. It was divided into
three rooms, a two bunk sleeping area, a
kitchen and dining area, and a restroom
with a shower. Since crew members work
24-hour shifts, they needed a place to
rest, eat, and decompress between
duties.
Level two, the middle floor, held the
actual control center, the operational
nerve center of the facility, where the
crew could receive and execute a launch
order. This was where they spent most of
their time. The crew typically consisted
of two officers, the missile combat crew
commander and the deputy missile crew
commander and two enlisted personnel,
the ballistic missile analyst technician
and the missile facilities technician.
At the center of the room stood the
launch control complex facilities
console, essentially the dashboard that
displayed the missile status and the
overall conditions of the complex. One
of the two launch key switches was
mounted here. The other we'll see
shortly.
To the left of the room sat the
emergency war or order safe, painted
bright red, often referred to as the
goto war safe. It contained the launch
keys and message authentication cards
needed for launch. All highly classified
materials. It was locked with two
separate combination locks, each known
only to one of the officers, ensuring no
single person could access its contents
alone. Next to the safes stood three
tall cabinets housing the radio
communication equipment. Beyond them was
the alternate launch officer's console
which handled all communication and
contained the second launch key switch.
The two key switches were placed far
enough apart so that a single operator
could not reach both. To initiate a
launch, both keys had to be turned
within two seconds of each other and
held for 5 seconds, a built-in safeguard
against unilateral action.
Around the room, additional panels
manage facility power, sight and missile
monitoring, launch control and
targeting, and the missile guidance
computer programming. One of these
panels contained the butterfly valve
lock control, a combination lock that
received its code only with official
launch orders. This system was a final
fail safe, preventing any unauthorized
or accidental launch. It locked shut a
butterfly valve in one of the missile
oxidizer lines supplying the first stage
engine. Also located on this level was
the fresh air intake, an air shaft
extending to the surface and fitted with
a blast valve. The valve was normally
open to allow ventilation, but in the
event of a nearby nuclear explosion, the
shock wave would travel through the
intake, pushing the valve piston shut.
The wave was then routed through a delay
pipe, whose transit time allowed the
valve to close completely before the
shock front arrived, protecting the
control center from destruction.
Level three, the lowest floor, houses
support equipment. Here were the
electrical power distribution systems
complete with battery backup as well as
communication equipment, a sewage
storage tank, and an air conditioning
unit that cooled the control center.
This level also stored emergency food
supplies, essential in the event of long
periods of enttrapment following a
nearby nuclear blast. If the main access
portal ever became unsafe or impassible,
the crew had an escape hatch leading
into the air shaft with a ladder that
climbed all the way to the surface.
Finally, cableways extended from the
control center carrying the vital power
and communication lines to the missile
silo, the largest structure on site. The
silo was built as two concentric
cylinders. The outer cylinder called the
silo equipment area contained every
system required to launch the missile.
It was divided into nine levels with the
cableway entering at level two. Each
level served a specific function and all
critical systems were mounted on
independent shock isolation platforms
suspended by springs to protect them
from nuclear blast shocks. A ladder way
connected all levels and an elevator
provided access between levels 2 and 8.
Six of the levels opened into the inner
cylinder called the launch duct. Each
fitted with blast doors and retractable
work platforms that allowed maintenance
crews to access different sections of
the missile within a precisely
controlled environment. The duct was 45
m deep. Near the bottom, the missile
rested on a ring-shaped platform called
the thrust mount assembly. suspended
from the duck wall by four massive
spring assemblies that absorb vibration
and held in place by dampers that could
be locked in place to hold the platform
steady during launch. The missile was
secured to the mount with four explosive
bolts that detonated just before launch,
freeing it from the platform.
The duct walls were lined with special
acoustic panels to absorb the sound
waves generated during launch, but these
alone were insufficient. To prevent the
missile from destroying itself with the
intense acoustic energy generated during
launch, a water deluge system was
installed beneath the missile's engine.
This system supplied thousands of liters
per minute through four nozzles,
absorbing most of the sound energy as
the water vaporized into steam upon
contact with the missile's exhaust.
At the very bottom set the flame
deflector, a massive structure that
split the missile's exhaust gases into
two ducts running upward along either
side of the launch duct. At the top,
Cascade Baines redirected the fiery
exhaust away from the missile,
preventing damage during liftoff.
Capping it all was the silo closure
door, a colossal slab of steel and
concrete weighing around 700 metric
tons, the equivalent of more than 10
fully loaded 737s. However, despite its
size, the door could be opened fully in
under 20 seconds.
The door rested on four dollies, each
equipped with four steel wheels, which
ran along two sets of tandem rails.
Beneath it, on level one set the door
drive system, which was made up of
hydraulic motors, a gearbox, and the
drive mechanisms that powered the
massive door. A long drive shaft
stretched across the level with pulleys
at either end that wound and unwound
steel cables to move the door. The silo
elevator drive system was installed
beside it while the hydraulic unit for
the door drive mechanism occupied the
opposite side of the level. Level two
contained water chillers supplying cold
water for the air conditioning units
throughout the complex.
Level three housed the silos, backup
generator, and electrical distribution
system. This level and the level below
were connected in two air shafts
extending to the surface like those in
the control center. Beginning on level
four and extending down to level six was
a massive water tank that stored 380,000
L of water needed for the deluge system.
Level five housed the air conditioning
units that cooled the silo along with a
large diesel fuel storage tank. Level
six housed the system that monitored the
missiles toxic propellant vapors along
with the hydraulic unit that powered the
retractable work platforms.
Level seven stored air compressors and
water pumps for the complex.
Level eight contained a pump for
propellant offloading as well as a
dehumidifier to keep the lunch dock
relative humidity below 30%.
Finally, level 9, reachable only through
floor hatches in level eight contained
the sumps and pumps that sent collected
water to the surface.
Every system inside the silo stood
ready, waiting for the order to launch,
and if it ever came, the process began
with a coded emergency action message
transmitted to the two officers on duty.
They wrote it down, cross-cheed it, and
verified its authenticity. Then using
the red safe, they retrieved the launch
keys and emergency war orders documents
and confirmed the command. Crew members
powered up the missiles weapons systems
and use the enable code from the message
to unlock the butterfly valve in the
first stage engines oxidizer feed line.
With the final verification complete,
both officers turn the launch keys
simultaneously, holding them for 5
seconds.
In that moment, there was no turning
back. The sequence was irreversible.
Once initiated, the missile would launch
automatically.
The missile's batteries activated,
transferring power from the silo to the
missile's internal supply. Propellant
began to flow. The water deluge system
flooded the flame deflector and above
the silo door rumbled open. The thrust
mounts locked in place. and then
ignition. Explosive bolts fired and the
Titan 2 tore free from its cradle,
climbing toward the surface. From key
turn to liftoff, the entire launch
sequence took just 58 seconds.
The Titan 2's legacy reached far beyond
its role as a cold war deterrent. Its
immense power made it the launch vehicle
for NASA's Gemini missions in the mid
1960s, carrying astronauts into Earth's
orbit and paving the way for the Apollo
program that followed. But progress
never stops. The Titan 2 was eventually
succeeded by the Minutemen missile,
which used solid fuel instead of liquid
propellants. This technology made it
safer, more compact, and less expensive.
While smaller in warhead yield and size
than the Titan 2, the Minutemen
delivered comparable performance. By the
1970s, the Minutemen had become the
backbone of America's ICBM force, and
over 1,000 missiles had been deployed.
After the Cold War, the Titan 2 era
quietly drew to a close. Its silos were
destroyed except for one preserved
historical site, the Titan 2 Missile
Museum in Arizona, where one final Titan
still stands, silent, a relic of an age
defined by both fear and innovation.
Quick shout out to our last giveaway
winner. Congratulations.
And a quick thank you to our Patreon and
YouTube members. You'll be getting this
exclusive desktop background inspired by
today's video. Before you go, make sure
you try Supremacy World War III, a free
online PvP strategy game set in modern
global warfare. Command a nation, battle
other players in real time, and conquer
the world through strategy. Click the
link in the description to claim your
exclusive starter pack, the Elite
Bomber. A $25 value for new players
only. Valid for 30 days. Thanks for
watching. Stay curious.